.\" This manpage is copyright (C) 1998 Branden Robinson <branden@debian.org>.
.\" 
.\" This is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2,
.\" or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with APT; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 
.\" 02111-1307 USA
.TH apt 8 "14 April 2004" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.\" 
.\" Translated into german by Helge Kreutzmann <kreutzm@itp.uni-hannover.de>
.SH NAME
apt \- Fortschrittliches Paketverwaltungswerkzeug
.SH ZUSAMMENFASSUNG
.B apt
.SH BESCHREIBUNG
APT ist eine Verwaltungssystem für Software-Pakete. Es befindet
sich noch in der Entwicklung; die todschicken Oberflächen sind noch nicht
verfügbar. In der Zwischenzeit lesen Sie bitte
.BR apt-get (8).
.SH OPTIONEN
Keine.
.SH DATEIEN
Keine.
.SH SIEHE AUCH
.BR apt-cache (8),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR apt.conf (5),
.BR sources.list (5)
.SH DIAGNOSTIK
apt liefert Null bei normaler Funktion, dezimal 100 im Fehlerfall.
.SH FEHLER
Diese Handbuchseite wurde noch nicht mal begonnen.
.PP
Siehe <http://bugs.debian.org/apt>. Falls Sie einen Fehler in
.BR apt 
melden wollen, lesen Sie bitte
.I /usr/share/doc/debian/bug-reporting.txt
oder verwenden Sie das
.BR reportbug (1)
Kommando.
.SH AUTOR
apt wurde vom APT-Team  <apt@packages.debian.org> geschrieben.
