.\" This manpage is copyright (C) 1998 Branden Robinson <branden@debian.org>.
.\" 
.\" This is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2,
.\" or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with APT; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 
.\" 02111-1307 USA
.TH apt 8 "16 June 1998" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NAME
apt \- Advanced Package Tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B apt
.SH DESCRIPTION
APT is a management system for software packages. For normal day to day
package management there are several frontends available, such as
.BR aptitude (8)
for the command line or
.BR synaptic (8)
for the X Window System. Some options are only implemented in
.BR apt-get (8)
though.
.SH OPTIONS
None.
.SH FILES
None.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt-cache (8),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR apt.conf (5),
.BR sources.list (5),
.BR apt_preferences (5),
.BR apt-secure (8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
apt returns zero on normal operation, decimal 100 on error.
.SH BUGS
This manpage isn't even started.
.PP
See <http://bugs.debian.org/apt>.  If you wish to report a
bug in
.BR apt ,
please see
.I /usr/share/doc/debian/bug-reporting.txt
or the
.BR reportbug (1)
command.
.SH AUTHOR
apt was written by the APT team <apt@packages.debian.org>.
