.\" This manpage is copyright (C) 1998 Branden Robinson <branden@debian.org>
.\" and Manoj Srivastava <srivasta@datasync.com>.
.\" 
.\" This is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2,
.\" or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with APT; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 
.\" 02111-1307 USA
.TH ftp.conf 5 "16 June 1998" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NAME
ftp.conf \- configuration file for APT FTP method
.SH DESCRIPTION
The ftp.conf file determines the behavior of the FTP method for the APT
packaging tool.  The syntax of the file is
.IR variable = value .
Quotes are not required around
.IR value s.
Comments start with a '#' and end at the next newline. Blank lines are  
ignored. The following
.I variables
are understood:                        
.IP Firewall
is the hostname of a machine which acts as an FTP firewall. This can be 
overridden by an environment variable                                   
.IR FTP_FIREWALL .
If specified, and the given hostname cannot be directly contacted, a connection
is made to the firewall machine and the string
.B @hostname
is appended to the login identifier. This type of setup is also known as an
FTP proxy.
.IP ProxyLogName
is a parameter used by some firewall FTP proxies. It is used to authorize
the user specified by
.I ProxyLogName
to send data beyond the
.I Firewall
machine.
.IP ProxyPassword
is the password used to authenticate
.I ProxyLogName
on the
.I Firewall
machine.
.IP TimeOut
sets a timeout value in seconds (the default is sixty seconds).
.IP Passive
is either
.B true
or
.BR false .
If true, then all data transfers will be done using passive mode. This is
required for some dumb FTP servers and firewall configurations. It can
also be overridden by the environment variable
.IR FTP_PASSIVE .
.IP Verbose
is either
.B true
or
.B false,
and makes the FTP method output more data than it normally does.
.IP Debug
is either
.B true
or
.B false,
and makes the FTP method output debugging information. This variable is 
not currently implemented.                                              
.IP MaxReTry
sets the number of times a connection is re-tried before giving up (the
default is twice).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt (8),
.BR apt-get (8)
.SH BUGS
See <http://www.debian.org/Bugs/db/pa/lapt.html>.  If you wish to report a
bug in
.BR apt-get ,
please see
.I /usr/doc/debian/bug-reporting.txt
or the
.BR bug (1)
command.
.SH AUTHOR
APT was written by the APT team <apt@packages.debian.org>.
