.\" This manpage is copyright (C) 1998 Branden Robinson <branden@debian.org>.
.\" This translation is copyright (C) 2003 The Spanish translation group
.\"  <debian-l10n-spanish@lists.debian.org>
.\" 
.\" This is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2,
.\" or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with APT; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 
.\" 02111-1307 USA
.TH apt 8 "16 Junio 1998" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NOMBRE
apt \- Herramienta Avanzada de Paquetes
.SH SINOPSIS
.B apt
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
APT es un sistema de gestión de paquetes de software. No hay aún interfaces
amigables para éste, ya que está aún en desarrollo. Consulte mientras
tanto, 
.BR apt-get (8).
.SH OPCIONES
Ninguna.
.SH FICHEROS
Ninguno.
.SH LEA TAMBIEN
.BR apt-cache (8),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR apt.conf (5),
.BR sources.list (5)
.SH DIAGNÓSTICO
apt devuelve cero cuando no ocurre ningún error. Si hay algún error
devuelve el valor 100.
.SH ERRATAS
Esta página de manual no está siquiera iniciada.
.PP
Consulte <http://bugs.debian.org/apt>. Si desea enviar un informe de error
en
.BR apt ,
por favor lea
.I /usr/share/doc/debian/bug-reporting.txt
o el programa
.BR reportbug (1)
.SH AUTOR
El equipo APT <apt@packages.debian.org> escribió apt.
La traducción de esta página de manual fue iniciada por
Rudy Godoy <rudy@kernel-panik.org> y revisada posteriormente por 
Ismael Fanlo, Rubén Porras y Javier Fernández-Sanguino.
